MCP server requirements doc (#144)
mathesar-foundation/mathesar-wiki: docs/product/requirements/2025/mcp-server.md

# MCP Server

> | **Role**     | **Person**  | **Status**     |

Reviewer: I removed this from the template, please remove here too, before merging.

> | **Role**     | **Person**  | **Status**     |
> | ------------ | ----------- | -------------- |
> | **Author**   | Zack Krida  | 🟢 Done        |
> | **Reviewer** | Kriti Godey | 🔵 In review   |
> | **Reviewer** | Brent Moran | 🔵 In review   |
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

## The Problem

["Vibe coding"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vibe_coding) has become a popular paradigm for software development, empowering users with varied expertise to create their own software. Databases are an inherently complex, but often necessary, part of software development. Interacting with them typically requires significant technical knowledge. This is often a pain point for users ([example](https://www.reddit.com/r/vibecoding/comments/1kx72kj/how_do_you_keep_your_ai_agents_vibing_with_your/), [example 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/vibecoding/comments/1k5su89/vibe_coding_got_me_far_but_backend_almost_broke/)) that Mathesar can help solve.

Mathesar can serve as a development companion and admin back-end for vibe-coded applications. When integrated with a [Model Context Protocol (MCP) server](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/introduction) server, Mathesar transforms into a natural-language-powered bridge between the complexity of databases and the ease of vibe-coding.

> Although users haven’t explicitly asked for this functionality, there are strong indicators—drawn from competitors, the tech media, and internal stakeholders—that a simple, beta-level MCP server integration would be highly valuable. This is an opportunity to be at the forefront of AI integrations in data platforms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although users haven’t explicitly asked for this functionality, we hypothesize that a simple, beta-level MCP server integration would be highly valuable in helping semi-technical users that are new to building applications work with databases, and make Mathesar useful for a whole set of new workflows without having to add new features within the product.
```

Reframed to focus on user-outcomes rather than org-outcomes, plus make it more clear that this is our hypothesis.

### Is it feasible to solve?

We’ve already conducted a time-boxed 2-hour experiment that yielded a working prototype. Some refinement is needed, especially for type safety and authentication, but technical feasibility is confirmed.

## Use Cases

As a non-technical t-shirt business owner "vibe coding" my shop's application using an LLM, I want to:

> 

Reviewer: I think we need to add some bullets around actually setting up the DB / discovering they need a DB, etc. to document the full user experience. A t-shirt business owner is likely not thinking in terms of 'database schemas'.

- Model my app's database schema using natural language, where prompts like "I need a way to store users and their passwords in my application" result in the creation of database tables.
- Have an easy-to-use user interface for making quick edits to my app without having to code an entire backend.
- Ask an LLM to show me my app's top-selling products without configuring a complex data exploration interface.
- Generate product descriptions via AI and populate them in the product table using a single natural language prompt.

## Success Criteria

We'll know we've succeeded if users are using the MCP server, as indicated by the following signals:

- Users give feedback on the MCP server, via GitHub issue. Bug reports, feature requests, or outright complaints are all positive signals here.
- GitHub stars on the MCP server repository increase.

> - Content (blog and social posts primarily) about Mathesar's MCP server sees notable traffic.

Reviewer: Maybe also add something about a user using Mathesar for vibe coding successfully?

## Requirements

> - Create an MCP server which users can run locally to connect to a Mathesar instance.

Reviewer: These requirements are a bit too broad. We want the requirements to be from the user's point of view / user stories. e.g. 'Provide an easy path for users to set up a Mathesar instance using LLMs to assist', etc.

### Is it feasible to solve?

We’ve already conducted a time-boxed 2-hour experiment that yielded a working prototype. Some refinement is needed, especially for type safety and authentication, but technical feasibility is confirmed.

## Use Cases

As a non-technical t-shirt business owner "vibe coding" my shop's application using an LLM, I want to:

- Model my app's database schema using natural language, where prompts like "I need a way to store users and their passwords in my application" result in the creation of database tables.
- Have an easy-to-use user interface for making quick edits to my app without having to code an entire backend.
- Ask an LLM to show me my app's top-selling products without configuring a complex data exploration interface.
- Generate product descriptions via AI and populate them in the product table using a single natural language prompt.

## Success Criteria

How we'll know we've succeeded with our goals:

- Users are using Mathesar's MCP server, as indicated by some signals:
  - Users give feedback on the MCP server, via GitHub issue or elsewhere.
    - Even bug reports will be a positive signal here!
  - GitHub stars on the MCP server repo

>   - Content (blog and social posts primarily) about Mathesar's MCP server sees notable traffic.

Author: I can't figure it out either. I've changed the structure to bypass the issue.
